<p>
Psychology is the science of the mind and behavior. It is both an academic
and applied discipline. Academic psychologists design research studies that
utilize empirical methods to test hypotheses about human or animal
behavior. The evidence may be quantitative and call for statistical
analysis or qualitative and call for a more interpretive approach. The
science of psychology is applied by practicing psychologists in a variety
of settings, including schools, hospitals, rehabilitation centers,
businesses, private mental health providers, and government agencies. The
scholarly literature in this field covers a range of areas, including
diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders and addictions, ergonomics,
motivation, decision making, forensics and wellness.
</p>

<p>
Psychology is generally recognized to be a social science, so articles in
this field are often similar to articles in other social scientific
research, but may also have features of hard science articles. Indeed, the
study of psychology is multidisciplinary, because behavior is a component
of humanities, arts, science and social sciences. Research in business,
communication, literature, history, engineering and many other disciplines
may draw on the scientific theories, empirical findings, or research
methods developed for the study of psychology. Further, there are
established subject specialties within psychology. At Mason, we have
programs in clinical psychology, applied developmental psychology, human
factors/applied cognition psychology, educational psychology and
industrial/ organizational psychology. Neuroscience and psychology are
increasingly intertwined as technologies allow us to see the connections
between the brain and behavior.
</p>

<p>
Psychology generates and tests theories and models to explain, predict, and
treat complex human behaviors. For instance, some psychologists use the
“Elaboration Likelihood Model” to explain the formation of new attitudes.
Likewise, some psychologists use the “Self Evaluation Maintenance Model” of
social comparison to understand self esteem and self evaluation. New
theories are created or evolve from historical theories and form the basis
for hypotheses which are tested through psychological research.
Standardized tests, measurements and structured experiments are central to
the process of evaluating hypothesis and developing theories. The results
of psychological studies are reported in the scholarly psychological
literature and at association conferences.
</p>
